Building CC3DML-Based Simulations Using CompuCell3D
===================================================

To show how to build simulations in CompuCell3D, the reminder of this chapter provides a series of examples of gradually increasing complexity. For each example we provide a brief explanation of the physical and/or biological background of the simulation and listings of the CC3DML configuration file and Python scripts, followed by a detailed explanation of their syntax and algorithms. We begin with three examples using only CC3DML to define simulations.

We use Twedit++-CC3D code generation and explain how to turn automatically-generated draft code into executable models. All of the parameters appearing in the autogenerated simulation scripts are set to their default values.


Short Introduction to XML
--------------------------

XML is a text-based data-description language, which allows standardized representations of data. XML syntax consists of lists of elements, each either contained between opening (``<Tag>``) and closing (``</Tag>``) tags:
``<Tag Attribute1="text1">ElementText</Tag>`` or of form
``<Tag Attribute1="attribute_text1" Attribute2="attribute_text2"/>``

We will denote the ``<Tag>…</Tag>`` syntax as a ``<Tag>`` tag pair. The opening tag of an XML element may contain additional attributes characterizing the element. The content of the XML element (``ElementText`` in the above example) and the values of its attributes (``text1, attribute_text1, attribute_text2``) are strings of characters. Computer programs that read XML may interpret these strings as other data types such as integers, Booleans or floating point numbers. XML elements may be nested. The simple example below defines an element ``Cell`` with subelements (represented as nested XML elements) ``Nucleus`` and ``Membrane`` assigning the element ``Nucleus`` an attribute ``Size`` set to "10" and the element ``Membrane`` an attribute ``Area`` set to "20.5", and setting the value of the ``Membrane`` element to ``Expanding`` ::

  <Cell>
    <Nucleus Size="10"/>
    <Membrane Area="20.5">Expanding</Membrane>
 </Cell>

Although XML parsers ignore indentation, all the listings presented in this chapter are block-indented for better readability.

.. include:: cell-sorting-simulation.rst
.. include:: angiogenesis-model.rst
